Title: Time-Series Foundation Model Embeddings for Remaining Useful Life Estimation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11990v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:59:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Time-Series Foundation Model Embeddings for Remaining Useful Life Estimation 

Amir El-Ghoussani ∗ Michele De Vita ∗ Ronald Naumann † Vasileios Belagiannis ∗∗ Friedrich-Alexander-Universit¨ at Erlangen–N¨ urnberg (FAU), Germany 

{amir.el-ghoussani, michele.de.vita, vasileios.belagiannis }@fau.de 

† Nokia Solutions and Networks GmbH & Co. KG, Germany ronald.naumann@nokia.com 

Abstract —Remaining Useful Life (RUL) prediction is essential for industrial predictive maintenance, yet many learning-based approaches rely on extensive feature engineering or large labeled datasets to train task-specific sequence models. In this work, we introduce a lightweight learning approach, in which we leverage a frozen pretrained time-series foundation model (TSFM) and combine it with a small regression head for RUL estimation from multivariate sensor streams. More specifically, we use Chronos-2 as a frozen backbone to extract context window features and train a lightweight regression neural network for RUL prediction. Experiments on real-world industrial sensor data from two device types show that Chronos-2 features consistently improve over recurrent, convolutional, Transformer-based, and gradient-boosting baselines under the same preprocessing and evaluation protocol. We further analyze the impact of context length and find that performance improves significantly with longer histories, indicating that TSFM representation offer a practical and data-efficient alternative for RUL estimation in industrial settings. 

Index Terms —remaining useful life, predictive maintenance, time series, in-context learning, foundation models, Chronos 2 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Predictive maintenance aims to forecast equipment failures, so that interventions can be planned in advance to minimise unexpected downtime and associated costs. A key metric in this context is the Remaining Useful Life (RUL) that is defined as the estimated time until an asset’s failure based on its current condition. Predicting device RUL based on multivariate sensor streams accurately is vital for effective maintenance, and is therefore a major focus in the prognostics field [1], [2]. Traditional data-driven RUL estimation usually relies on either handcrafted features or end-to-end sequence models, which have been trained using multivariate historical sen-sor measurements [3]. For one-dimensional sensor signals, encoder-decoder denoising with adversarial latent alignment have been used to learn noise-robust representations [4]. While deeper sequence models such as long short-term memory (LSTM) networks [5] and gated recurrent units (GRU) [6] can capture temporal patterns, they often require substantial labeled data and careful tuning for different sensor types. To address these limitations, temporal convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [7] and Transformer-based [8] models have been proposed for representation learning and long-range de-pendencies. Transformer-style architectures with hierarchical or multiscale attention are increasingly used to model sensor interactions over time in multivariate signal streams [9]. To 

We subdivide the multivariate sensor 

stream into context windows of 

length L.

We feed each window into a frozen 

pretrained TSFM to extract temporal 

context features. 

We train a lightweight regression 

head with embeddings Ht

features to predict RUL. 

Fig. 1. Overview of our lightweight approach to RUL estimation on industrial data. 

relax the labeling requirements, contrastive and self-supervised representation learning has also been used to pretrain on unlabeled sensor data before supervised RUL regression [10]. Related label-efficient temporal monitoring problems have also been studied in unsupervised anomaly detection, where models learn normal multi-agent trajectory behavior from unlabeled data and are evaluated on annotated abnormal scenarios [11]. Robustness to distribution shift under varying operating con-ditions is often tackled via adversarial domain adaptation [12]. In parallel, physics-informed hybrids introduce degradation structure to improve extrapolation and interpretability [13]. Generative diffusion approaches are explored for data augmen-tation and uncertainty modeling, both via diffusion models for generating realistic degradation trajectories [14] and stochastic diffusion-process models that predict RUL distributions [15]. However, these approaches require training on task-specific data, which can be resource-intensive and may not generalize well across different datasets. In contrast, we find that time-series foundation models (TSFMs) provide a way to obtain temporally rich representations without the need for extensive training. 

> arXiv:2606.11990v1 [cs.LG] 10 Jun 2026

TSFMs are predominantly trained and used for time-series forecasting tasks. Recent approaches such as Chronos [8] and its successor C HRONOS -2 [16] are probabilistic transformer-based TSFMs. Both versions are built on a decoder-only transformer architecture that tokenizes input time series into discrete bins. C HRONOS -2 enables efficient in-context learning without requiring fine-tuning. Kairos [17] uses masked token modeling to learn representations for multivariate time se-ries. VisionTS++ [18] applies vision transformer architectures to time-series patches for improved long-range modeling. TimesFM [19] leverages large-scale pretraining with a masked forecasting objective. PatchTST [20] divides time series into patches and processes them with transformers for efficient sequence modeling. MiroAI [21], is based on masked autoen-coding and large-scale pretraining. In this work, we introduce an approach leveraging pretrained TSFM representations for RUL estimation from large-scale sensor streams. We extend TSFMs beyond their traditional forecasting use case by treating RUL prediction as a supervised regression problem. We adapt C HRONOS -2 by loading a look-back window of past sensor measurements directly into the model’s context. From this context, we extract backbone representations and train a lightweight regression head on top, keeping the adaptation simple and efficient. Experiments on a large-scale industrial sensor dataset show that conditioning CHRONOS -2 on sensor-history context yields substantial gains, outperforming standard baselines—including non-sequential regressors—by up to 5×. We further find that context length is critical: expanding the context window to 80 steps dramatically improves performance by reducing MAE by 2× compared to a short 5-step context. II. M ETHOD 

To predict the RUL, we process the complete history of multivariate sensor data. Let X ∈ RT ×D represent the entire sequence of sensor measurements: 

X = [ x1, . . . , xT ], (1) where each xt is a D-dimensional vector of sensor readings at time t, and T is the total length of the time series. The goal is to estimate the RUL, denoted as yt, for each time step t. We approach this by mapping the input sequence to a sequence of RUL estimates via a combination of 2 models, consisting of a frozen pre-trained backbone Φ( ·) and a trainable regression head gϕ(·):

ˆyt = gϕ(Φ( X)t). (2) The following subsections detail the data processing pipeline, the specific architecture of the backbone and head, and our training protocol. 

A. Data Preprocessing and Label Generation 

Raw sensor measurements are recorded at irregular times-tamps due to network delays and asynchronous hardware. However, most pretrained TSFMs, including C HRONOS , re-quire regularly sampled data. For this reason, we linearly interpolate each sensor record to a uniform time grid with step size ∆t.Given irregular timestamps τk and τk+1 , we linearly inter-polate the value xt at a regular time t (where τk ≤ t ≤ τk+1 )as: 

xt = xτk + ( xτk+1 − xτk ) t − τk

τk+1 − τk

. (3) This yields a multivariate sequence with regular intervals 

{xt}Tt=1 . To prevent artifacts from long outages, we discard intervals where the gap between consecutive raw samples is higher than a threshold ∆tmax (τk+1 − τk > ∆tmax ) and only interpolate within valid ranges. Following resampling, we filter out faulty measurements containing NaN values. We apply a global outlier clipping strategy, clamping values to the 1st and 99th percentiles, and normalize sensor channels to zero mean and unit variance. All statistics are computed exclusively on the training split to prevent data leakage. 

a) RUL Label Construction: In addition to sensor mea-surements, we utilize maintenance logs containing the set of failure timestamps Trep . For a given timestamp t, the time of the next failure is defined as: 

tfail = min {t′ ∈ T rep : t′ > t }. (4) The RUL label is computed as the time remaining until this event: 

yt = tfail − t. (5) We express yt in days and cap such that yt ← min( yt, y max ),with ymax = 1000 days. Timestamps with no subsequent repair events are excluded from the supervised training set. 

B. Model Architecture 

Our approach leverages C HRONOS -2, a pretrained TSFM designed for probabilistic forecasting, as a fixed feature ex-tractor. We specifically utilize the chronos2 checkpoint. The TSFM follows a decoder-only transformer architecture. 

a) Context Extraction: We utilize the CHRONOS -2model, denoted as Φe, to extract high-dimensional features from a windowed sensor sequence Xt−L:t. By processing the sequence up to in a window of L timesteps, we make use of CHRONOS -2’s in-context learning capabilities, i.e. we extract embeddings that capture temporal context and dependencies across the context window of size L. Keeping the TSFM parameters frozen, we obtain a sequence of hidden represen-tations: 

H = Φ e(Xt−L:t) ∈ RL×h, (6) where h is the hidden dimension of the model and H =[ht−L, . . . , ht].

b) RUL Estimation: To predict the RUL at a specific time step t, we use the corresponding embedding vector ht−L:t

from the sequence Ht−L:t over the context window L. We employ a regressor head gϕ with parameters ϕ:

ˆyt = gϕ(ht−L:t). (7) The head is implemented as a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) consisting of two linear layers with a hidden width of m,utilizing ReLU activation. A final ReLU is applied to the output to enforce ˆyt ≥ 0. We apply dropout with rate p after the first hidden layer and optimize only the head parameters 

ϕ.III. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Dataset and experimental setup 

Our main experiments are conducted on industrial sensor datasets provided by Nokia Solutions and Networks GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, where the failure events are provided in repair logs. The datasets contain multivariate sensor streams from two different devices; we refer to them as Device A and Device B. We preprocess the data by resampling the sensor streams to a uniform time grid, normalizing each sensor channel, and computing RUL labels from the repair logs as described in Sec. II-A. For Device A, after preprocessing we obtain a total of 297 ,345 labeled samples. The sensors return multivariate sensor recordings with D = 87 , and we set the resampling step size to ∆t = 1 hour. The context window length L is set to 5 in the following experiments. In addition, we evaluate on a second dataset from Device B. After the same preprocessing procedure, Device B contains 119 ,364 annotated samples with D = 51 sensor channels. We use the same resampling step size ∆t and context length L.To prevent temporal leakage, we employ a chronological split. The training set consists of windows ending at t ≤ Ttrain ,while the test set contains windows where t > T test . We select split points to achieve an 85:15 ratio. Crucially, we discard any window [t, ..., T ] that overlaps the boundary between splits. We report performance on the held-out test set using Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Error (MSE). 

B. Implementation 

We train our approach using the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss and the Adam optimizer [22] with a learning rate of 10 −3.Training runs for a maximum of 50 epochs with a batch size of 64. The fine-tuning process requires about 2 hours on a single NVIDIA A6000 GPU. We train separate models for device A (≈ 300 K parameters) and device B ( ≈ 250 K parameters). 

C. Baselines 

We compare our approach against classical, non-sequential regressors trained on raw datapoints and lightweight sequential neural baselines trained on sequences with context windows length L.For the non-sequential setting, we evaluate linear regression and random forests [23] on normalized sensor vectors xt,using the same capped target yt and the same train/test splits as our method. For sequential baselines, we train LSTM [5] and GRU [24] regressors on the windowed inputs Xt−L:t ∈ RL×D

and predict ˆyt from the final recurrent state via a linear read-out. We additionally train gradient boosting [25] on window features ut = φ(Xt−L:t), where φ(·) computes per-channel statistical features (mean, std, min, max, quantiles), last value,                                            

> TABLE I SEQUENCE MODELS ON 5-STEP WINDOWS FOR DEVICE AAND DEVICE B.
> Device A Device B Method MAE ↓MSE ↓MAE ↓MSE ↓
> LinReg 173 44123 120 22123 RandForest 165 48655 112 15655 GrBoost 186 53400 130 33400 GRU 91 10236 102 9523 LSTM 93 12400 99 10212 TCN / Temporal CNN 88 9689 112 11435 Transformer (encoder) 90 10500 95 8900 Ours 44 6513 64 7212

first differences, and a linear trend slope over the L time steps. This baseline uses the same L, preprocessing pipeline, and chronological splits as our method. We further evaluate two strong convolutional and attention-based sequence models: a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) [26] and a Transformer encoder [27] regressor. Both models take Xt−L:t as input and output a scalar RUL pre-diction through a pooling operation over the time dimension followed by a linear output layer. All baseline hyperparameters are tuned on a validation split of ≈ 10% of training data and evaluated using the same metrics as our method. Preprocessing statistics, such as normalization and clipping thresholds are computed on the training split only and applied unchanged to the test splits. 

D. Performance on 5-step windows 

In Table I, we report results for sequence models trained on 

L = 5 -step windows for both Device A and Device B. On both datasets, moving from non-neural approaches (upper block) to neural network-based sequence modeling (lower block) yields a substantial improvement, indicating that even short context-windows carry significant information. Our C HRONOS -2 adap-tation further improves performance across both devices: con-ditioning C HRONOS -2 on temporal context, extracting internal embeddings, and adding a dedicated regression head achieves the best overall performance among evaluated models. 

E. Effect of Context Length 

We study how the length of context windows affects CHRONOS -2 on both devices by varying L. For each L,we generate the windowed inputs Xt−L:t using the same resampling rate ∆t and the same chronological split protocol, keep the C HRONOS -2 backbone frozen, and retrain only the MLP head. We leave all other hyperparameters fixed. Each setting is evaluated after training our approach for 50 epochs. For the remaining baselines, we retrain and re-tune for each 

L using the same validation split. Figure 2 shows the effect of varying context length L for Device A. The performance of our approach improves signifi-cantly as L increases, with the most substantial gains observed up to L = 80 . Beyond this point, performance saturates. In contrast, other baselines show only mild fluctuations with increasing L, indicating that they do not effectively leverage longer context windows. The TCN and Transformer baselines 0 20 40 60 80 100 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

Context length L

> MAE  ↓

Device A 

Ours 

TCN 

Transformer 

GRU 

LSTM 

GradBoost 

Fig. 2. MAE versus context length L on Device A. Baselines show mild fluctuations; TCN and Transformer are the strongest baselines while Ours shows significantimprovement over all basselines. TABLE II ABLATION ON REGRESSION HEAD ARCHITECTURE .

Head MAE ↓ MSE ↓

TCN (for comparison) 88 9689 Linear 60 8044 2-layer MLP 44 6513 4-layer MLP 45 6342 

are the strongest among the non-TSFM approaches, but still significantly underperform compared to our method across all context lengths. 

F. Ablation: Regression head 

We ablate the capacity of the supervised regression head while keeping the Chronos-2 backbone frozen in table II. Specifically, we replace our default MLP head with a linear head and a deeper MLP variant (4 layers), using identical pre-processing, context length L and training budget. All ablations are done on device A. Our goal is to determine how much of the perfor-mance gain can be attributed to the pretrained C HRONOS -2representations versus the supervised regression head. If CHRONOS -2representations are the primary factor of perfor-mance, then a simple linear head should already achieve most of the performance improvemnt, and increasing head capacity should provide only small improvements. On theother hand, if performance improves as the head becomes deeper, this indicates that a large fraction of the mapping from inputs 

Xt−L:t to RUL yt is learned by the regression head rather than the pretrained backbone. When compared to the TCN baseline, even a linear head on top of frozen C HRONOS -2embeddings achieves a significant improvement (MAE 60 vs. 88 ). This shows that the pretrained backbone provides a strong representation for RUL estimation. The 2-layer MLP outperforms the linear head, indicating that some nonlinearity is beneficial for mapping C HRONOS -2embeddings to RUL predictions. However, increasing the head capacity to 4 layers does not yield significant further improvements. IV. C ONCLUSION 

This paper studied whether a pretrained time-series foun-dation model can serve as an effective feature extractor for RUL estimation in industrial predictive maintenance. In our approach, a simple adaptation that leverages the frozen CHRONOS -2backbone , we extract context-dependent em-beddings from multivariate sensor windows, and train alightweight regressor to predict RUL. On the Nokia dataset, the approach achieved lower error than a broad set of classical and deep learning baselines, and an ablation over context length showed that longer histories can substantially improve performance. Beyond raw performance, we discussed evaluation and modeling choices that are critical for trustworthy RUL results. As future work, we plan to (i) leverage Chronos-2’s probabilis-tic outputs to provide calibrated uncertainty for maintenance decisions, (ii) improve multivariate tokenization and channel handling for heterogeneous sensors, and (iii) evaluate robust-ness under missing sensors, operating-regime shifts, and low-label settings. REFERENCES [1] A. K. S. Jardine, D. Lin, and D. Banjevic, “A review on machinery di-agnostics and prognostics implementing condition-based maintenance,” 

Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 1483– 1510, 2006. [2] X.-S. Si, W. Wang, C.-H. Hu, and D.-H. Zhou, “Remaining useful life estimation – a review on the statistical data driven approaches,” 

European Journal of Operational Research , vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2011. [3] A. Saxena, K. Goebel, D. Simon, and N. Eklund, “Damage propagation modeling for aircraft engine run-to-failure simulation,” in 2008 Interna-tional Conference on Prognostics and Health Management . Denver, CO, USA: IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–9. [4] L. Casas, A. Klimmek, N. Navab, and V. Belagiannis, “Adversarial signal denoising with encoder-decoder networks,” in 2020 28th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO) , 2021, pp. 1467–1471. [5] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997. [6] K. Cho, B. van Merri¨ enboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio, “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation,” in 

Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) . Doha, Qatar: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2014, pp. 1724–1734. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/D14-1179/ [7] X. Li, Q. Ding, and J.-Q. Sun, “Remaining useful life estimation in prognostics using deep convolution neural networks,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety , vol. 172, pp. 1–11, 2018. [8] A. F. Ansari et al. , “Chronos: Learning the language of time series,” 2024. [9] Z. Fan, W. Li, and K.-C. Chang, “A two-stage attention-based hierar-chical transformer for turbofan engine remaining useful life prediction,” 

Sensors , vol. 24, no. 3, p. 824, 2024. [10] E. Fu et al. , “Supervised contrastive learning based dual-mixer model for remaining useful life prediction,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16462 [11] J. Wiederer, J. Schmidt, U. Kressel, K. Dietmayer, and V. Belagiannis, “A benchmark for unsupervised anomaly detection in multi-agent tra-jectories,” in 2022 IEEE 25th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) , 2022, pp. 130–137. [12] J. Du, L. Song, X. Gui, J. Zhang, L. Guo, and X. Li, “Remaining useful life prediction under variable operating conditions via multisource adversarial domain adaptation networks,” Applied Soft Computing , 2024. [13] F. Jiang, X. Hou, and M. Xia, “Spatio-temporal attention-based hidden physics-informed neural network for remaining useful life prediction,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12377 [14] W. Wang, H. Song, S. Si, W. Lu, and Z. Cai, “Data augmentation based on diffusion probabilistic model for remaining useful life estimation of aero-engines,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety , vol. 252, 2024. [15] B. Wen, X. Zhao, X. Tang, M. Xiao, H. Zhu, and J. Li, “A generalized diffusion model for remaining useful life prediction with uncertainty,” 

Complex & Intelligent Systems , 2025. [16] A. F. Ansari, O. Shchur, J. K¨ uken, A. Auer, B. Han, P. Mercado, S. S. Rangapuram, H. Shen, L. Stella, X. Zhang et al. , “Chronos-2: From univariate to universal forecasting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15821 ,2025. [17] K. Feng, S. Lan, Y. Fang, W. He, L. Ma, X. Lu, and K. Ren, “Kairos: Towards adaptive and generalizable time series foundation models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25826 , 2025. [18] L. Shen, M. Chen, X. Liu, H. Fu, X. Ren, J. Sun, Z. Li, and C. Liu, “Visionts++: Cross-modal time series foundation model with continual pre-trained vision backbones,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04379 , 2025. [19] A. Das, W. Kong, R. Sen, and Y. Zhou, “A decoder-only foundation model for time-series forecasting,” in Forty-first International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , 2024. [20] Y. Nie, “A time series is worth 64words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14730 , 2022. [21] G. Woo, C. Liu, A. Kumar, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, and D. Sahoo, “Unified training of universal time series forecasting transformers,” 2024. [22] D. P. Kingma, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014. [23] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction , ser. Springer series in statistics. Springer, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.de/books?id=eBSgoAEACAAJ [24] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555 , 2014. [25] J. H. Friedman, “Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine,” Annals of statistics , pp. 1189–1232, 2001. [26] C. Lea, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal convolutional networks: A unified approach to action segmentation,” in European conference on computer vision . Springer, 2016, pp. 47–54. [27] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.